THAT THE relationship with China is among the more exciting ones in India's global engagement has been borne out again this week with two sets of talks taking place simultaneously in the capital. One was about resolving the longstanding boundary dispute and the other was about expanding partnership through comprehensive economic cooperation. The exploration of opportunities on these two fronts are in fact inter-related. Together they constitute what one might call, paraphrasing one of Mao Zedong's slogans in a different context, "walking on two legs." Thanks to the new efficiency and speed, Sino-Indian relations have never been as sound as they are today. 

Is this a new beginning or a passing phase? Is the current momentum in bilateral relations sustainable? These questions are indeed relevant. For, the absence of normal neighbourly relations between India and China has been a geopolitical reality in Asia for decades. That past, it can be asserted now, is no longer a guide to the future. It is possible to argue that Sino-Indian relations are on the threshold of a paradigm shift and that the current level of cooperation between the two is only the tip of the iceberg. As political problem-solving and deepening economic cooperation begin to take root, the nature of the Sino-Indian engagement could be radically different in the coming years.
Any suggestion of a paradigm shift would surprise both enthusiasts and sceptics on Sino-Indian relations. The official engagement between New Delhi and Beijing has reached a level of maturity that has not been anticipated by either side of the long divisive debate on China within the nation. Within a short span of time after the brief chill that descended on Sino-Indian relations following the nuclear tests of May 1998, New Delhi and Beijing have rapidly transformed their bilateral relationship. The public debate on China has tended to lag behind the official policy direction. 

Underlying this transformation has been a new Indian pragmatism that has evolved over the years in approaching the relationship with China. That realism began with the visit of Atal Bihari Vajpayee to China in 1979. It broke a big taboo in Indian thinking about the relationship with China after 1962. Nearly a decade later Rajiv Gandhi travelled to China to produce that elusive political breakthrough — the simultaneous pursuit of a solution to the boundary problem as well as a rapid normalisation of bilateral relations. Both Mr. Vajpayee and Rajiv Gandhi had to face intense opposition from their own parties and the foreign policy establishment against what was seen as "adventurism" in the diplomacy towards China. 

This institutional resistance, however, succeeded during the 1990s in slowing down the pace of Sino-Indian rapprochement. Mr. Vajpayee did pick up the threads again during his visit in 2003 and opened the doors for a more purposeful negotiation on the boundary dispute and a more imaginative approach to future economic cooperation. More fundamentally, Rajiv Gandhi and Mr. Vajpayee were instrumental in burying the victim mentality that India carried since the 1962 war with China. A new generation in India with greater self-confidence about its own future is now capable of thinking about the difficult issues with China in a more relaxed manner.
That the initiative for recasting the relationship with China has come from both Congress and the Bharatiya Janata Party is an important guarantor of national consensus, which is so necessary to deal with the emotive boundary question with China. The third round of talks on the boundary dispute this week have demonstrated the commitment of the Congress Government to pursue the process initiated by its predecessor with equal vigour. This has provided the much needed assurances to the Chinese on the continuity in India's approach to the boundary question. There is no reason to believe that the Manmohan Singh Government will not keep the BJP leadership fully in the picture on the boundary negotiations with China and preserve the current valuable national consensus. 