The news India has yet again cancelled a planned tour of Pakistan, has struck another blow to the ICC's bold new World Test Championship. After all the political wranglings over Zimbabwe and Kenya in the recent World Cup, news that world events continue to interfere in the cricketing calendar can come as no real surprise.

With both Australia and New Zealand having cancelled Test tours in the last 18 months and Pakistan now playing home series in Sharjah, rarely, even during the apartheid era of rebel tours and boycotted players, can political events have taken such a great toll of cricket in such a short space of time.

Perhaps the saddest thing about this from cricket’s point of view, is that the Championship seems likely to stand or fall not by its own merits, but by virtue of outside events. And this was the big idea which was supposed to secure the future of Test cricket in an arena increasingly dominated by the demand for one-day internationals.

The 5-year cycle of all nations playing each other set out to provide a true guide to where each team stood in relation to all the others and the firmest proof yet of whom the true champions are. Only through this initiative, the theory went, could the public worldwide be re-enthused with a passion for the longer, purer form of the game and the depressing trend towards ever emptier stadia in South Africa, New Zealand and lets face it, pretty much everywhere else bar England and Australia, be reversed. There could be no faulting the motive and no doubt of the need for concern in that respect.

There was another option of course. A World Test Cup, modelled on the high-profile event which sparked off the one-day revolution back in the 70s. But, this was commonly thought to be too impractical, too lengthy. How to get past the draw problem? How could we be sure the best team would be crowned world champions? And wouldn’t this just devalue the rest of Test cricket? Well, no innovation comes without its own problems, as the Championship has quickly demonstrated.

Aside from the problems of war and politics, the Championship came with a few in-built flaws of its own. Perhaps the primary one was its length. Could a competition stretched over a 5-year cycle attain any level of sustained tension? It would lack a natural denouement, the excitement of a tight run-in to the end of a season could never be matched when the title might be all but sealed with a year still to run. And the next opportunity for a tight finish still half a decade away. The best team would surely win the title, this is true, but is that in itself not something of a flaw? The balance of power is slow to shift in Test cricket. West Indies were at the top of the tree for 15 years, Australia have already been there for 10. In international competition weaker sides cannot go out and buy themselves a winning team, they have to grow one themselves,which takes time.