That the initiative for recasting the relationship with China has come from both Congress and the Bharatiya Janata Party is an important guarantor of national consensus, which is so necessary to deal with the emotive boundary question with China. The third round of talks on the boundary dispute this week have demonstrated the commitment of the Congress Government to pursue the process initiated by its predecessor with equal vigour. This has provided the much needed assurances to the Chinese on the continuity in India's approach to the boundary question. There is no reason to believe that the Manmohan Singh Government will not keep the BJP leadership fully in the picture on the boundary negotiations with China and preserve the current valuable national consensus. 

India and China are negotiating their boundary dispute in a radically different manner. In the past they argued on the basis of historical precedent and legal claims. While both sides have inherited what seemed inflexible positions, they have agreed to resolve the question within the overall political perspective of the evolving bilateral relationship. In short the current negotiation is a political one rooted in their calculus of national interest. Beijing and New Delhi have agreed that there has to be "give and take" in resolving the boundary dispute. Those mutual concessions will have to be worked out — on the basis of a broad set of principles — in the coming rounds of boundary talks.
The second factor transforming the relationship is an economic one. The dramatic expansion of bilateral trade in recent years has provided a stabilising element that did not exist before. Starting from a few hundred million dollars in the mid-1990s, bilateral trade touched $7.5 billion last year and is expected to cross $10 billion this year. Coupled with India's commerce with Hong Kong and Taiwan, Greater China today is already India's third largest trading partner. While the Sino-Indian trade has many structural limitations, it has not showed any signs of slowing down and continues to grow rapidly. 

This booming commerce has laid the foundation for a solid relationship based on expanding stakes in mutual cooperation. The relationship is no longer tied to nice sounding political rhetoric in good times and mutual recrimination in bad. Until recently politics had been in command of Sino-Indian relations. Now economics has begun to drive the relationship. It is in this context that India and China have begun to discuss comprehensive economic cooperation. This could be the first step towards the consideration of a free trade area between the two nations. If India is looking at free trade arrangements within South Asia and with South East Asia, it stands to reason India begin to explore a similar arrangement with China. 

The Manmohan Singh Government has been somewhat cautious about free trade agreements. That caution is apparently rooted in the determination to ensure that commitments made abroad are in tune with domestic economic considerations. Over the long run however, the Government cannot but be aware of the fact that deeper engagement with China, which is on its way to becoming the world's second largest economy, is both necessary and inevitable. Deepening Sino-Indian economic cooperation will also become one of the building blocks of a future Asian economic community, which could emulate the many features of European economic integration.
The political consequences of expanding Sino-Indian economic cooperation would not necessarily be linear. As the interaction between two of the world's largest economies begins to gather momentum, it will have profound consequences. One, it will result in greater pace of economic integration between the two Asian giants and their abutting regions. Multiple layers of economic integration involving India, China, South Asia and South East Asia are already under consideration. There can be no preferred exclusive spheres of economic influence for New Delhi or Beijing. The former cannot be kept out of South East Asia and the later will not opt out of South Asia. 

In both these areas India and China have been seen as rivals in the past. But in future New Delhi and Beijing might find new opportunities to cooperate in trans-regional energy and economic projects in both the regions. The national oil companies of India and China today bid for equity oil all around the world and occasionally find themselves in the same consortium, for example in the Sudan. There is no reason why the emerging large corporations in both countries will shy away from thinking about participation in mega projects in their own neighbourhood.